[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name, is Steven Halpern,
and I am a sound healer,
composer, musician, recording
artist, and producer,
as well as a researcher,
author, and educator.
I was doing music without a
beat, that didn't have a name.
This was before new age
music was what it was.
And because what I
was bringing through
was a new form of music
that didn't have a context,
I had to explain it.
And since there
weren't record labels,
I had to start my own record
label, learn how to distribute,
and learn about business,
which was one of the hardest
transitions I ever made.
So as a kid, what I
remember was always
been fascinated by sound.
The wind in the trees, the
radiator, the steam radiators,
making all those little
percussive sounds.
I would be playing
with the rhythms,
and just hearing little
melodies in my head, which
I thought everybody did that.
One of the first
memories I have,
very vaguely, is when we lived
in a place called Flushing,
in Queens, outside
of New York City,
I would crawl down the hallway
to a neighbor's apartment
and just sit outside
their doorway
because I could hear music,
and I didn't know what it was.
It was something
that my soul needed.
My parents never played music.
There was no music in the house.
No instruments.
No piano.
They didn't play radio or music.
It was all news, all the time.
The good part of that, for me,
was that I wasn't programmed
to this is classical music,
and this is the only music,
and you have to do this.
Later on, we didn't
have a piano,
I had a friend whose
parents had a piano.
I would play tonal
colors, and I would just
get lost in the sounds.
It was kind of New Age
music for nine-year-olds,
but I was into the textures,
and into the harmonics,
and the overtones.
When we moved to Long
Island, we basically
eat dinner in the kitchen.
I was closer than I am
right now to these lights
to the refrigerator.
And the rumble of
the refrigerator,
the resonance of
the low frequencies,
always gave me
indigestion and gas.
My father would yell at me.
He says, why do you
always have gas?
I said, well, the refrigerator
is hurting my stomach.
He says, don't be ridiculous.
Sound can't affect you.
It's invisible.
It doesn't affect me.
I don't have gas, so shut
up and eat your spinach.
My father certainly
never understood me.
My mother was a Jewish
mother, so she was supportive,
but she didn't understand
what was going on.
So that was my childhood.
[JAZZ MUSIC]
In the second grade, in school,
we were offered melody flute.
So I was playing that.
You know, you play
"Hot Cross Buns."
That was very boring.
The next year, they offered
us band instruments.
There was a trombone,
and there was a trumpet,
there was a clarinet.
We had all these things.
And the trumpet only
had three little valves.
I thought, well, that's
going to be the simplest
one, not knowing that that
would be the hardest one.
[PLAYING TRUMPET]
The first day of
junior high school,
there were two guys
who were improvising
without reading little
black dots, Dixieland Music.
And it was like, how
are they doing that?
I walked right up to them
and said, who are you,
and how do you
know what to play?
And they, well, we're jamming.
You play what you feel.
Well, I don't feel anything.
You know?
How do you know what to feel?
Well, there are notes that go
with chords, and this and that,
and here's our teacher.
You can go study with him.
A light turned on in my head.
I said, that's for me, and
that set me on the stage
to learning about improvisation.
The breakthrough for me happened
pretty much the second week
up at the University of Buffalo.
I was invited to sitting
with the faculty jam
session was going, playing music
in the style of John Coltrane.
And the leader saw
my trumpet case.
He says, get up here.
And I'm sitting in.
I'm jamming.
And then, I'm playing all
the fancy riffs and phrases
that I knew.
And in that high energy
vortex, suddenly, the trumpet
started playing itself.
Trumpet's a hard
instrument to play.
You have to get your emboucure
right, your diaphragm support.
And suddenly, it was effortless.
I had tapped into
another level of energy.
I was a freshman playing with
graduate students and faculty,
and going into altered
states, going into the zone.
And that's what really opened
up levels of musicianship
that were far beyond just
what I could do with my mind.
I had a great jazz
rock band in 1968-69
that was heralded to be
the next Blood, Sweat,
and Tears in Chicago.
We went to New York for
the recording session.
We got royally ripped off.
And the blessing of that
is I had two weeks off
before I went back
to graduate school.
I'm now 22.
This 1969.
I was invited to audition at the
sister organization of Esalen,
the great Human
Potential Organization.
And they said, wait, come
back in a couple hours.
You can hang out down the road.
I was sitting in a Redwood Grove
at a spontaneous meditation.
I heard this beautiful music.
And I actually heard,
one of the few times
in my life, the words,
this is the music
that you've been
seeking to understand.
Healing music for
the 20th century
based on ancient principles.
Your job is to bring
it out into the world.
And I'm thinking,
how do I do that?
I'm a trumpet player.
I don't have a keyboard.
But that sounds like a
keyboard, but one I've
never heard before.
I have no money.
I go back to where I
think the meeting is.
There's no one there.
But there's a piano.
And I sit down at
the piano, and I just
start going into the trance.
I go into state, and start
playing the music I just heard.
I was familiar with piano,
but it was not an instrument
I had really studied.
But I knew music, and my
hands just went over notes,
and I'm floating off.
And about 10 minutes later,
I hear some rustling.
I look around, and there's 10
people on the floor doing yoga,
meditating.
And someone else
says, who is this guy?
Where did he come from?
And someone's
like, oh, remember,
I told you I met this
guy by the mailbox.
He's auditioning for the
job of a staff position.
And someone else says, hire him.
My life changed that instant.
I called Buffalo and
said, I'm not coming back.
I literally had the clothes
on my back, a trumpet, guitar,
and a backpack.
And the deepest learning for
me was being at a keyboard
and getting out of the way.
And that was also tied
into the ancient Greeks,
tuning into their muse,
with the goal of an artist,
a writer, a musician, was
to connect with your muse,
to connect with the
divine, and that's
what I started seeking and being
able to do through my music.
Bridge Mountain Foundation
was like the little Esalen.
People go to Esalen
then come there.
So I would meet
the leading people
in the Human Potential
Movement in that days, Dr. John
Lilly, Dr. Stanley Krippner
leading psychics Anne
Armstrong.
And all of them would say,
well, this is fantastic,
but how do we know it works?
How is this
different than music?
Where's the beat?
Where's the melody?
Where are the words?
Well, this is not
what it's about.
It's about shutting down the
analytical part of the brain.
It's about dealing with
being rather than doing.
So to be taken seriously,
you need to do research.
How do I do research?
Dr. Krippner said,
well, I've just
been offered the Associate
Dean of a new program
at Sonoma State College.
We would love to have
someone like you do research
at the Human Potential
Institute, HPI.
And that was the beginning
of the whole rest of my life
and career.
Most music locks us into
a predictive mode, a brain
state where you are analyzing.
You're in the beta
state, like we're
speaking right now, where the
brain's electrical pulsations
are between, let's say, 13
and 30 cycles per second.
So the alpha state
is a little lower,
between eight and 12 cycles.
When you get deeper, you're into
the theta state, between four
and seven cycles per second.
And sleep is between
one and three.
And so when we're
able to measure that,
we found that mostly
music keeps you
locked in the beta state of
typical ordinary consciousness,
and it locks you into the
future, the predictive mode,
and it's the exact
opposite of mindfulness.
If I were to demonstrate
that right now
by singing a little scale.
(SINGING) Do, re,
mi, sol, la, ti.
And I don't finish that.
You hear that note in your head.
You will hold your
breath waiting
for me to sing that last note.
And I coined the phrase
Scalus Interruptus.
Well, what that does,
it creates stress.
And as a type A individual
coming from New York,
I had enough stress.
I needed something
that was not stressful.
And in the '60s,
a lot of us were
looking for music to help us,
you know, chill and mellow out.
And there wasn't a lot of it.
From Iselin and from the
Bridge Mountain Foundation,
I went to graduate
school, and then there
was no work for a
musician playing
meditation music in 1970, '71.
So I was a music teacher.
I was a music specialist.
I went around to high
schools, and I was a coach.
When I was in grad school, we
were told about it a physician
from New York, a guy named
Dr. Irving Oyle, O-Y-L-E,
the Father of Holistic Medicine.
No one knows it
better than that.
But he wrote the first
book, "Healing in the Mind."
He does sonopuncture,
and he's into all sorts
of alternative things.
I bring my reel to
reel recorder, set up
in his waiting room,
and babies are crying,
and people are waiting.
And within about five
minutes, everybody's quiet.
Dr. OYle comes and says,
what's going on here?
Who are you?
I'm the guy that has
the interview with you.
Is that your music?
I go, yeah.
It's quieting everybody.
Come right in right now.
So he became my mentor.
A couple years later,
when the first Conference
of Spirituality and Psychology
and Science, The Mind
Can Do Anything, was being
held at UC Santa Cruz,
he said, well, come on
down and meet with us.
Bam.
So suddenly, I'm in
front of 1,000 people.
And when I play my
chakra-balancing music
in the first break, the
audience is going, oh, my gosh.
Dr. Virginia Satir,
and Dr. Norman Shealy,
Uri Geller, major people who
became the leaders in the Human
Potential Movement.
And then people who were
putting on their own conferences
around the country would
say, we are putting
on a conference like that.
We want to have you there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The big major
international conference,
The World Symposium on Humanity,
was happening in Vancouver.
At the same time, 1976,
I said, I want to go.
I don't have the money.
I was a starving musician.
You know, the spiritual
belief at that point,
if you want to play
great music, you
have to be a starving musician.
We found out that
that's not true.
You play better music if
you have your rent paid.
But I went up there and
started playing my music,
and people heard it, and they
said, well, this is fantastic.
We're doing the first conference
in London in the spring.
We need to have you there.
Suddenly, I am in
London in April 1977.
I'm one of the few Americans
there, and I'm a huge hit.
And I'm suddenly international.
I'm on BBC.
I'm on the news, in print.
And that's how I
started exploding.
In one of those
first conferences,
I heard the phrase
that music is a carrier
wave for consciousness.
When you play music, it's not
just the notes, but the energy
that comes through.
And long before people were
talking about intention,
this aspect of the carrier wave
of consciousness, from day one,
my intention was
to create and bring
through music that
would serve the highest
and best in the listener.
It wasn't coming from ego.
As a jazz-playing trumpet
player, lot of ego.
We practice a lot
and, dammit, you
were going to be
impressed, because we
could play faster, and
higher, and fancier
than the rest of you.
That was the gig.
[PLAYING TIBETAN BOWLS]
I was working before the term
mindfulness came into vogue.
But when it started
becoming a meme,
we realized that this is what
my music has always done.
It anchors people
in the here and now,
because it doesn't
have to go somewhere.
All the things that I
used to be criticized for,
your music doesn't go anywhere,
said my faculty advisor
in grad school.
Right, it's already there.
And that taps into the
ancient Buddhist aspect.
When you play Tibetan
bowls or Buddhist bowls,
it's right there.
It doesn't go anywhere.
What the ancient
bowls were doing
was setting up an
entrainment matrix
that would get people into an
alpha state and a theta state.
I remember the first time I
was at a lecture by Alan Watts,
and he hit the big
Japanese temple bowl.
Some of us in the audience
were going, OK, next.
And I remember he looked
at me and said, some of you
don't know how to
listen to the bowl.
Listen to the
furthest away sound.
It doesn't have to go somewhere.
You don't have to do something.
Just be with it.
And that's how I became,
basically, the Johnny Appleseed
of talking about sound healing.
What I was doing was
teaching and educating
people about the
fact that there's
a whole field, an ancient
field, of sound healing,
of music healing,
and it's available.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Then when the recording
technology was around,
that I could be in the studio
and just go into the state
and allow the music
to flow, and that's
when I put out my first albums.
And people were writing,
I've been looking for music
like this for years.
When my first album came
out, it was the first album
that was distributed nationally
and advertised nationally
in the New Age magazines,
offered to people
looking for meditation.
The first name that I
had was "Chakra Suite."
But in those days, people didn't
know what chakras were, outside
of the small community.
And I had to change the name to
"The Spectrum Suite," because I
was dealing with the
electromagnetic spectrum,
and that would also be a context
that the media understood,
that I was relating sounds
and colors to these energy
centers, the chakras.
I'd look back at this now,
it was almost magical.
But they said, here's
a guy that comes in.
He doesn't have
everything prepared.
He comes, he meditates
for a half hour,
he pays us to just
sit in the room.
And then he plays, and
he doesn't make mistakes.
And he gets an album done
in a couple of hours.
We've never seen that.
So they say, we don't know
what he's doing, but it works.
And that was the beginning
of my record career.
I don't go into recording
thinking scientific things
with the music.
Sometimes, I actually
look down, and it
appears that I'm levitating.
I'm often playing
with my eyes closed,
and I'm listening to the
way the harmonies, as I
play certain notes and sustain
them, blend after I play them.
So I create notes
that I don't play.
And the harmonies
that happen after I
play the notes that
swirl in the expanded
overtones of the sustains--
Indian music has that
with the way sitar
and with the gourds that
have the resonant chamber,
the tambura, that
work on the overtones.
When I discovered Indian music--
it was love at first hear--
I got into the
overtones and understood
that it's not just
the notes, but they
might spend an hour tuning up.
This is part of the concert.
They are tuning the
instruments, but they're tuning
themselves and the audience.
Wow.
Breakthrough.
So when I go in the
studio, I tune myself,
and then I become the
instrument of the instrument.
And the music plays through me.
It becomes non-mental.
It becomes non-ego, because
music is being played.
And as a producer,
I create soundscapes
that are more than
what was recorded.
The music lets me know.
And my job is to
translate and make
audible what is already there.
Sometimes, it's like the
music is already there.
And I'm just transcribing
it and bringing it through.
And other times, I know it's
a conscious co-creation.
And then other times where
I am totally surprised.
Things will happen in the studio
that I never expected to do.
And when that happens,
usually, there's
a big smile that
happens on my face,
and I know that I'm
getting some help.
My engineer would say,
wow, when that happened,
the room filled with light.
So my engineer and
I would describe
that as a voltage surge.
And that was cool for him.
And I knew that that was part
of the magic that was going on.
Because early on, I learned
that I'm not in this alone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How does sound heal?
It heals many ways.
But one of the main ways, it
allows your human instrument
to come into a higher
state of coherence.
Your brainwaves shift
into a balanced state.
When I was in London,
the first time in 1977,
I met the leading brainwave
researchers in the world
at that point, Dr. Maxwell Cade.
I was invited to his laboratory.
They hooked me up with
their biofeedback equipment,
the most sophisticated in the
world at that point, the minor.
And they found that my music
did something different
than any other music.
And they said, we must
have hooked things
up wrong with all the
electrodes and everything.
So they took everything apart,
and they glued everything
back on, and it happened again.
And they looked to me
and said, your music
is doing something different.
We've listened to classic--
the only other time we have that
happen is with Tibetan monks
who are doing
[CHANTING]---- chanting.
But most people
can't listen to that.
So how does it happen?
There's several things.
It's the notes.
It's the space in the notes.
The fact that it
doesn't make your brain
go in a linear fashion,
in a predictive modality.
But allows it to be.
It allows it to expand, but
both hemispheres of the brain
become balanced
and in synchrony.
With the biofeedback and
the brainwave mapping,
most music would create a left
hemispheric dominant response
in the beta range.
What Dr. Maxwell
Cade and Geoffrey
Blundell and the
associates, they have found,
is that my music will create
what was called the Fifth
State of Healing, that
only the Tibetan monks,
the leading English healer
at the time, Rose Gladden,
and out of nowhere, my music was
balancing in the hemispheres.
And you could see that.
And that was unique.
So a lot of the music that
you hear now doesn't do that.
It's pleasant.
It's nice, but it doesn't
have the medical aspects.
It doesn't get the
body in a state
where healing happens more.
You're still paying
attention to the music.
My music gets to a state
where you're not just
paying attention
to music, you hear
beyond the music, where
the listener tunes
into what I'm tuning into when
I'm receiving the music, when
I'm recording the music.
That state is related
and transmitted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
| didn't have to become
the authority and say,
my music is healing.
Well, also the AMA frowns on it.
The FDA frowns on it.
There was a time that the FDA
considered albums like mine
to be medical devices
because relaxation could
be considered a medical effect.
And anything that affects
the structure and function
of human organism could be
called a medical device.
And they looked at me and
says, your album says,
you'll be transported to
a state of relaxation.
I said, well, yes,
everyone feels that.
They said, well, you're
making a medical claim.
And I say, wait a minute.
When I go out and
look at a sunset,
and I get into a relaxed state,
are you going to bust the Sun?
He says, no.
The Sun is not making a claim
on the back of their album.
And I said, whoa, does
that mean you're going
to shut people like me down?
He said, well, we're
thinking of that.
The whole field--
they were trying
to shut down the whole field.
They were looking at shutting
down guided imagery, hypnosis.
And I said, so what should I do?
He said, well, take all
your albums off the market.
Get rid of the word relaxation.
Certainly get rid of
the word brainwaves.
And then we'll let
you back on the market
and we won't put
you out of business.
So I did that at great expense.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When the Grammy nomination
happened in 2012,
it came out of the blue.
And when the announcement was
made, my name was among them.
And everyone was
shocked, including me.
And I said, well, it's
an honor to be nominated.
And then some of my
friends said, well,
you know, go for it.
Let's set the intention
that when the votes come in
and you're at the Grammy awards
ceremony, they read your name.
And every night, I am
getting affirmations.
I'm getting my speech
just dictated to me,
and I write down.
So I have notes ready, because
it's clear I am going to win.
When it came time, I moved
from the back of the room.
I was in the third
world, behind Questlove.
And they said the New
Age Album of the Year
is-- and I stood up.
And my name was not read.
So I had to sit back
down, and people around me
heard me say
something under my--
not so much under my breath.
But I had a speech
ready that was
going to talk about
brainwave entrainment.
That was going to say
so much in 35 seconds,
because it was written, I knew
it, and I was loaded for bear.
Didn't happen.
And it was an honor.
And you know, the
career isn't over.
And the next album that I'll
be submitting this next year,
I think, will be one that
will be in contention.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you Google
brainwave entrainment,
there's huge amounts
of information.
There's a lot of
information now about music
tuned to 432 Hertz, which is
a more biological frequency
than a 440 Hertz, which is
standard concert tuning.
[MUSIC - HALPERN, "AWAKENING"]
The harmonic of the
Earth itself is basically
about eight cycles per second.
This is what's also known as
the Schumann Resonance that
was measured in 1957.
So when we get into the
most natural healing state,
we literally entrain to
the dominant frequency
of the planet itself.
And what we think
is that if music
is played at 432
Hertz, tuned to that,
it may be even more healing
than music tuned to 440.
Now what that does not mean
is that any music at 432
is better than any music at 440.
Bad music at 432 is not
better than good music at 440,
because all the research that
was done on my early albums
were done with
"Chakra Suite" at 440.
But my latest album, the sound
healing, I put out a 440 Hertz
album, and then I did
the 432 Hertz album.
Same notes.
And if you listen to them back
to back, it's hard to tell.
So what I started doing is
just listening exclusively
to the 432 Hertz version.
I got to tell you, the
music feels more artful.
When I saw chanting with
it, my voice opened up more.
And I noticed the
difference immediately.
And on the new album, because
it's a 432, it mixed itself.
It just was automatic.
And when you get
a gift like that,
you know that that's
not an accident.
You know that there's
something else going on,
and you just say thank you.
You know, wherever that guidance
and inspiration is coming from,
it's clear there's an
unseen hand coming through.
This is what I incarnated for.
When I had a reading with Kevin
Ryerson, an all-time great, who
worked with Shirley
MacLaine, the first thing
that I was told was, it was
so good to see you again.
He says, we worked together
in the Temple of Akhenaten
back in ancient Egypt when
you were a priest working
with science of
mantra, teaching people
the new mantras
and the new chants
that Akhenaten was bringing in
I had always had resonances,
as many people do,
of ancient Egypt.
But I thought that was just
a figment of imagination.
But when I started getting
different readings of people
who did not know me at all,
and all told me the same thing
over and over, I began to
accept that this is who I am.
And then, I wanted to say, how
come I don't have more money
to do the research, or
to do the publicity,
and do the advertising that
would get more people to it--
that hasn't been part
of the Dharma so far.
But when I look at
the arc of my life,
as I go back over
the last 45 years
of the professional
career, there's
been that strong guidance,
that the people that
have been brought to me, and
I've been in contact with,
this is what I have been for.
As I look back, it's clear
that I follow guidance,
and I've had guidance
throughout my life
to be so many
synchronicities that, had I
been 20 seconds earlier or
later in some of these times,
I would have missed
the connection.
But it was the perfect
timing to meet these people.
My life has brought
me in contact
with a lot of master scientists,
musicians, spiritual teachers.
I mean, I look back at this now,
I mean, it was almost magical.
Bottom line is, it works.
And that's been part
of what the legacy is.
Number one, to still
have a career in music
after 45 years, other than
some of the legacy rock groups.
"Chakra Suite,"
"Spectrum Suite,"
as well as some of
the new ones, are
streamed amazing
amounts of times.
When you have millions of
people who are now saying,
Alexa, play "Chakra
Suite," play Halpern.
I've always given
credit that I built
upon the shoulders of pioneers.
And like at the Grammys, it's
all about the song, the voice
quality.
And there's something
special about that.
It's my own special recipe.
And I've had that since day one.
It allows the
inner silence to be
felt. Where the music doesn't
take you out of yourself,
music brings you into yourself.
You connect to
the higher realms,
the higher intelligence,
the higher spirituality.
Because so many
musicians have told me,
my work has inspired
them, and they learn,
and they take this out, and
express it in their own ways.
So that's the ongoing legacy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]